.TH mp3rtp 1 "July 22, 2026" "LAME 4.1" "LAME audio compressor"
.SH NAME
mp3rtp \- encode audio to mp3 and stream it as RTP
.SH SYNOPSIS
mp3rtp <ip> [port[:ttl]] [options] <infile> <outfile>
.SH DESCRIPTION
mp3rtp encodes audio the same way
.BR lame (1)
does, and additionally sends each encoded frame as an RTP packet to a network
address.
It is meant for streaming a live or recorded source, for example a sound card,
to one listener or, using a multicast address, to several at once.
The encoded stream is written to <outfile> as well, so the broadcast and the
file are produced in one pass.
.PP
Both file operands are mandatory.
To read from stdin, use "\-" for <infile>.
To write to stdout, use "\-" for <outfile>; it is not a way to discard the
output, so redirect it to the null device if the file is not wanted.
.PP
mp3rtp is not built by default.
It is available when LAME was configured with
.B \-\-enable\-mp3rtp
and the system provides the socket functions.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B <ip>
Destination address of the stream, as a numeric address.
IPv6 addresses are accepted unless LAME was configured with
.B \-\-disable\-ipv6.
Host names are not resolved.
.TP
.B port[:ttl]
Destination port, optionally followed by a colon and the multicast time to
live.
Port defaults to 5004 and TTL to 2.
This is a separate argument from <ip>, not part of it.
.TP
.B options
Any option
.BR lame (1)
accepts, for example
.B \-b
to set a bitrate,
.B \-V
for VBR quality, or
.B \-\-resample.
The options are passed on unchanged, so the encoder behaves exactly as it
would without the streaming.
.SH EXAMPLES
Broadcast a sound card to a multicast group at 56 kbit/s, keeping no local
copy:
.PP
.nf
arecord \-b 16 \-s 22050 \-w | mp3rtp 224.17.23.42 5004:2 \-b 56 \- /dev/null
.fi
.PP
Stream to a single listener with the default port and TTL, and keep the
recording:
.PP
.nf
arecord \-b 16 \-s 44100 \-w | mp3rtp 10.1.1.42 \-V2 \-b128 \-B256 \- out.mp3
.fi
.SH BUGS
mp3rtp is a work in progress and is less exercised than
.BR lame (1)
itself.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lame (1)
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
mp3rtp written by Felix von Leitner.

LAME originally developed by Mike Cheng and now maintained by
Mark Taylor, and the LAME team.
(See https://lame.sourceforge.io/).
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
